---
layout: post
title: "Why did I make my blog uglier?"
description: "Discover the reasons behind the transformation of my blog and the benefits it brings. Experience faster writing, simplified design, reduced distractions, and a sense of complete ownership. Explore the enhanced aesthetics that prioritize minimalist style and direct communication. Find out why this revamped blog reflects my unique vision."
tags: opinion
---


Last night, I completely revamped my blog. This morning, I showed it to my wife and siblings, hoping they would appreciate the new look. However, none of them liked the updated aesthetics. Despite their opinions, I couldn't care less. I absolutely adore the new appearance and here's why:

- **Improved writing experience**: my blog is build on Jekyll, and every time I made a change, it took about a minute to refresh the page. This slow and tedious process hindered my writing flow. However, now the refresh time is less than a second, enabling a much faster and smoother writing experience.
* **I just have what I need**. Before I had a navigation bar, a search box, light/dark button, and a lot of other thinks that I wasn't using. Maintaining all these extras became burdensome and slowed down any changes I wanted to make. Now I just have a couple of html templates and that's all. This gives me a sensation of solidity in the software sense about my blog and I don't expect to have weird bugs that are difficult to solve due to code complexity. Now I own all the parts of the project, which relieves me and avoids unnecessary worries. 
* **The blog is designed to avoid distractions**. Before the blog was full of colours and buttons, which in my ADHD opinion diverted attention away from the essential elements: the text and ideas. I wanted to create a design that focused on eliminating distractions and keeping the focus on the content.
* **It's 100% mine**. Before I was using a standard Jekyll template ([Chirpy](https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy)), but now all the code is mine which gives me a strange feeling of satisfaction. It's entirely my creation, and that alone brings me joy.
* **The blog is prettier**. Although everyone claims that the blog is uglier, I can't help but believe that it has become much more beautiful. I love simple aesthetics and blogs direct to the point. Don't get me wrong, I don't appreciate simplicity without any thought given to style like [Dan Luu's](https://www.danluu.com) blog, I believe that the right amount of CSS makes the reading experience much better. For example, one of my favourite blogs in terms of style is this [one](https://gregorygundersen.com/).

If you like it feel free to just copy the code from [here](https://www.github.com/alexmolas/alexmolas.github.io). Besides the simplicity and the style, it has some cool features such as an automatic blogroll generation based on your favourite blogs ;)
